For the next subtopic in continuous random
variables, we'll be looking at the normal
distribution. The normal distribution is a
special type of continuous random variable
where the probability density function looks
like this. We call this a bell-shaped curve.
The actual probability density function of the
normal distribution is something something like
the form P(x) = e^-x^2 however we don't
actually need to know this in SACE stage
2 methods. Instead of using a function we think
about the normal distribution being controlled by
two variables - those are the mean, which is the
middle of the bell-shaped curve (so here) and the
standard deviation, which hopefully you remember
controls the spread of the data. So that's the
standard deviation there. When a variable is
normally distributed, we have special notation
we use to write that. It looks like this: x (being
the continuous random variable) is approximately
normally distributed, and then within these
brackets, we write the mean and then the
standard deviation squared. So let's say the time
I take to get to school is normally distributed
with mean 30 and standard deviation 5 minutes we
would write that as: X is approximately normally
distributed with mean 30 and standard deviation 5
and then we write squared just for the notation.
The standard deviation is still five not 25. Most
continuous random variables can be modelled using
a normal distribution if we just set the mean and
the standard deviation to the appropriate values.
This is because of two important properties of the
curve: firstly, the distribution is symmetrical
and most of the data is concentrated around the
mean, and secondly, as we approach the extremes
(so this side and this side), the data becomes
less frequent. We can see that the example from
before fits both of these properties - if I were
to track the time it took me to get to school on
most days of the week it would usually be about 30
minutes so most of the data would be concentrated
around the mean it would be less likely that I
would take 45 minutes and equally less likely that
I would take 15 minutes. So as we go towards
the extremes, the data becomes less frequent
therefore this continuous random variable can be
modelled using a normal distribution just as for
any probability density function we represent
the the values on the x axis so if I wanted to
find the probability of me making it to school
between 25 and 28 minutes I would draw that like
this with the values on the X axis and then the
probability is found as the area between these
two values so this green area would represent the
probability that X is between 25 and 28 minutes
to actually find this probability we can use our
calculator our calculator is able to calculate
areas under the graph for the normal distribution
so in this case we would go to stat mode and then
press distribution normal and then NCD we can then
input our data so the lower and upper values are
25 and 28 and then the mean is 30 and the standard
deviation is 5 and this gives us a probability of
0.859 I'll go through these steps in more detail
later when we do some practice questions together
there is one important property of the normal
distribution that we need to know and that is
because it is symmetrical the mean is the same
as the median which is the same as the mode we
can verify that by looking at the graph the mean
is here the median is also here because the area
on each side is 50% and the mode is here because
it is the highest value of probability let's do
some example questions in the first one we have to
match normal distributions A and B to X and Y we
can see from the graph that A and B have the same
mean remember we can find the mean by looking at
the midpoint of the normal distribution this makes
sense because X and Y both have mean 10 however
distribution a has a larger standard deviation
than distribution B we can see that because it is
more spread out so therefore distribution a must
be X because X has a higher standard deviation
three compared to the standard deviation of
Y which is two so a is X and B is y second
question we have a normally distributed variable
X with mean 10 and standard deviation 2 firstly
we need to find the median so remember that for
normal distributions the mean median and mode are
the same so the mean is going to be 10 and the
mode is also going to be 10 part C says find the
approximate range this is a question which doesn't
show up very often in tests but the approximate
range of a normal distribution is the mean plus
or minus three standard deviations this is because
if we were to calculate this probability we would
find that it's equal to about 99.7% of all of the
data it's not 100% because the true range of the
normal distribution is from negative Infinity to
Infinity see here we can see that these arrows
go to negative infinity and positive Infinity
so in this case finding the lower bound of the
range we take 10 and we subtract three standard
deviations so 3 * 2 that's 10 - 6 which is 4 and
then to find the upper bound we find 10 plus three
standard deviations so that's 10 + 6 which is 16
then to find the range or the approximate range we
just subtract these numbers so 16 - 4 is = 12 if
you want a visual representation of that it looks
something like this so the mean is here and then
we've got one standard deviation on either side
two standard deviations on either side and then
three and then the approximate range would be this
okay now let's look at calculating probabilities
using the normal distribution so we've got the
volume of petrol bought normally distributed
mean 36 and standard deviation 7 firstly find
the median and the mode so remember that the
median and the mode are always the same as the
mean so these will both be 36 Part B says find the
percentage of customers who buy less than 28 L of
petrol so when we're doing a normal distribution
question there's always three things that we need
to do the first thing is that we need to define
the variable so we write let the volume of petrol
bought be X this is so that later when we use the
letter X the marker knows that we're referring to
the volume of petrol Bo secondly we need to State
the distribution so we say that X is approximately
normally distributed with mean 36 and standard
deviation 7 squared thirdly we need to write the
probability statement so in this case we want the
percentage of customers who buy less than 28 l so
each probability statement starts with a p and in
this case we want the volume of petrol bought to
be less than 28 so we write X is less than 28 now
to calculate this probability we need to use our
calculator for the normal distribution we press
stat mode and then press distribution and then
normal there's three options here and which one
we use depends on what we're trying to find so
NCD is when we are given the values and we need
to find the probability inverse normal is used
when we are given the probability and we want
to find the values so for this question let's
draw it out you don't have to do this every time
but it makes it easier to visualise we know that
the mean is 36 and the standard deviation is 7 we
want to find the probability that X is less than
28 so we Mark 28 here and then we want to find
the probability that X is less than this value
so therefore we need to find the area underneath
this value we can see that in this case we are
given a value and we need to find the probability
so we are going to use NCD the stuff you put into
here is pretty self-explanatory so we put mean
is 36 and standard deviation is 7 now the lower
and the upper are the values on the lower bound
of this area and on the upper Bound in this case
we don't have a low bound so we're just going to
use a really low number so I just use 99999 and
the upper bound is 28 then we press execute
this gives us a probability of approximately
0.127 let's do another question to save time
while I'm reading the question I like to define
the variable and write the distribution so we
read Marathon times are normally distributed
therefore I can write let the marathon times b x
with mean 196 and standard deviation 24 so X is
approximately normally distributed with mean
196 and standard deviation 24 part A we need
to find the probability that someone finishes in
exactly 3 hours so remember the third thing to do
is write the probability statement so we always
start with a p and in this case we want X to be
exactly 3 hours so X is equal to 180 just note
that I converted 3 hours into minutes because
all of these units are in minutes now we can
use the calculator to find this if we want and
in this case because X is equal to 180 we would
put both the lower and the upper to be 180 but
remember this property for a continuous random
variable if we have a continuous random variable
which exactly equals a value the probability will
always be zero and that's because the area under
the curve for that straight line is going to be
zero Part B says find the probability that we
finish in more than 3 hours so we've already
done these first two things and they're not
changing for the question so we don't need to do
them again we just have to write the probability
statement always start with p and in this case
we want X to be more than 3 so X is greater than
180 I'm going to sketch the distribution to make
it easier to visualise although we don't have to
do this every time so the mean is 196 standard
deviation 24 180 would be somewhere around here
and we want the probability that X is greater
than 180 so that's this upper area here now we
use our calculator to find this probability so
because we have the values and we're finding
the area or the probability we use NCD the lower
bound in this case is 180 and the upper bound is
infinity so we just put a really high number
like 99999 we put the mean in which is 196
and the standard deviation which is 24 this
gives us a probability of 0.747 part C says
find the probability we finish between between
164 and 187 minutes so we write the probability
statement we want X to be in between 164 and 187
again I'm going to draw the distribution just to
make it easier to visualise so mean of 196 and
then we want it to be between 164 and 187 that
would be this area here once again we are given
the values and we need to find the probability
or the area so we're using NCD the mean and the
standard deviation are already there from before
so we just need to put the lower as 164 and the
upper as 187 and this gives us a probability
of 0.26 so after watching this video you should
be able to do the following things describe why
most continuous random variables can be modelled
using the normal distribution secondly we need to
know the properties of the normal distribution
including the mean median mode and approximate
range remember that the mean median and mode are
all the same and then the approximate range is
the mean plus or minus three standard deviations
finally and this is where most of the questions
will come from we need to find probabilities
for the normal distribution when we are given
values remember that this was using NCD in
the calculator in the next video we'll look
at what when we are given probabilities and we
need to find the values that's called quantiles